so the next segment is going to give you
some examples of difficulties with human
language that make it very difficult for
NLP systems to understand them the
example in the box is time flies like an
arrow you can even think about it you
will probably immediately come up with a
very reasonable interpretation of the
sentence
however the sentence has more than one
interpretation and some of those
interpretations may not be as reasonable
as grammatical as the one that you first
thought about what are the different
interpretations can you think about them
well the most obvious meaning of the
sentence was that time flies very fast
as fast as an arrow therefore we can say
time flies like an arrow however this is
a metaphorical interpretation and as you
can imagine computers are really not
that good with metaphors so they may
just as well come up with other
interpretations of the center's that are
much more literal let me run you through
two such possible interpretations in the
first one we start from a sentence like
flies like honey as in the insects
called flies like to eat honey then we
modify the sentence slightly to say
flies like an arrow I mean this is just
something else that they like it's an
arrow it's not honey but it's still a
valid object of the verb like and
finally we can change the sentence to
fruit flies like an hour so some
specific kind of flies like an arrow so
this is not a valid interpretation of
this original sentence yet another one
is to think of the word time as a verb
so it's like you take a stopwatch and
you use it to time the race in that case
you can say well let's time the flies
and then we can go back to the original
sentence time flies like an arrow let me
run you through some more classic
examples of ambiguous sentences and
confusing sentence is a natural language
the first one is about Beverly Hills
everybody knows that Beverly Hills is a
city in California if we teach a
computer to recognize that let's say
compound like this
the name of a city it will probably
interpret the next one also as a city
where as many of you probably have heard
of the name Beverly Sills and know that
this is actually the name of a famous
person another example is the boxes in
the pen this is an example from a horse
rubber helo from close to 100 years ago
this sentence has a very obvious
interpretation if box could be contained
inside a pen however because boxes are
usually larger than pens it would have
to have a completely different
interpretation in that case we are not
going to assume that pen is a writing
instrument but instead we are going to
assume that pen must be something larger
than a box or it could be the
interpretation of 10 as a place where
animals live this is very different from
the pen is in the box which very clearly
talks about the writing instrument
because it can fit inside the box so the
lesson to learn here is that word order
can matter a lot next example is maybe
in su our mothers the thing about the
sentence for a second how many mothers
do we have here well Mary is the mother
su is a model that makes two mothers
well if we say Mary and sewer sisters
the sentence looks very similar to the
previous one and yet in most contexts it
would mean that Megan's two are sisters
of each other
and therefore they're not in the same
semantic relationship as the ones in the
previous sentence every American has a
mother
how many mothers is that Wow we assume
that it means that they're roughly as
many mothers as America's it is the same
order of magnitude but if we change just
a simple word here to every American has
a president we're going to see that the
semantics of the sanest changes a lot in
this case there is only one president
for all Americans as opposed to the
previous example where there were many
mothers and the final example is we gave
the monkeys the bananas because they
were hungry who is they
Wow because they is the subject of war
hungry it must refer to monkeys because
bananas cannot be hungry whereas in the
next example we
say we gave the monkeys the bananas
because they were overripe well who was
override well again common sense tells
us that it was the bananas and not the
monkeys so the lesson to learn here is
that two sentences may look very similar
on the super superficially but then when
you want to translate them into some
semantic representation you may not be
able to do this in a straightforward
manner because there are many subtle
interactions that come into play so
let's not talk about the difference
between syntax and semantics they often
in the linguistics literature people use
stars and question marks to indicate
that the certain sentence is incorrect
it's not grammatical in some way and the
difference between the two is that the
first sentence here little a has Marilyn
the sentence is not syntactically
correct when you would expect to see a
sentence like mary has a little lamb
which has the correct syntactic
structure so services that are
syntactically inaccurate are usually
marked with stars now what about a
question mark the second example are
from Chomsky 1957 says colorless green
ideas sleep furiously well if you think
about this sentence it is actually
syntactically well-formed it has a
subject just like mary has a little lamb
in this case the subject is colorless
green ideas it has a verb phrase sleep
furiously and the whole sentence sounds
syntactic ly correct however its
semantics its meaning is problematic in
more than one way what are the problems
here well the first one is that ideas
usually don't sleep in order to sleep
some entity has to have this capacity
and ideas doesn't fall in the category
of things that can sleep the second
problem is that when you sleep you
usually sleep peacefully not furiously
so the combination of sleeping with
adverb furiously is incongruous and
finally we have colorless green ideas
which is Paula Matic in two ways itself
color isn't green our two adjectives
but they contradict each other cannot be
both green and colorless at the same
time
and finally ideas cannot be described as
colorless or green or both because ideas
again don't have the property of color
or colorlessness so to summarize this
slide we want to make a distinction
between syntactically poorly formed
sentences like the first example and
sentences that are semantically
incorrect or poorly formed like the
second one let's look at different kinds
of word ambiguity let's start with three
very simple words that you see every day
the word ball the word board and the
word plant what are the meanings of
those words well they have more than one
meaning each of them has in fact as many
as ten or fifteen different senses what
about the words fly grant and tape Wow
they can also be ambiguous but in a
different way they don't just have
different senses they also have
different parts of speech for example a
fly can be a noun and to fly can be a
verb event is a noun to grant is a verb
so this is a difference in part of
speech and the third category is the
words that I'm just showing you here try
to pronounce those words and see what
they have in common just give it a try
and on the next slide I'll explain what
they have in common so let's look at the
answers to the quiz a dress or a dress
can be pronounced differently whether it
is a noun or verb there are many other
words like this for example transport
versus to transport affect and outline
versus outline Aggies aunt versus resent
for example as a verb in infinitive it
means to hate somebody and resent means
to send a letter a second time it's
pronounced very differently again
entrance can be a noun or it can be a
verb which means to put somebody in a
trance and they're pronounced very
differently entrance versus to entrance
and finally number can be either number
if it means the comparative of the
adjective numb
or it can just be the word number as
enough now computer languages don't have
this kind of problem of ambiguity
they're designed to be unambiguous it
turns out that there are also human
languages that are unambiguous by design
one such example is large bun and the
picture that you see next to the name is
the official logo of that language it
was designed specifically to be
unambiguous there are examples of
ambiguity also in what I known as noun
noun phrases so a sequence of three
words can be parsed either as a group of
the first two that is then modified by
the third one or as a group of the last
two which is then modified by the first
one so which instance do we have here
science fiction writer is of the first
kind where science fiction is a type of
literature and a science fiction writer
is somebody who writes science fiction
customer service representative again
customer service is a unit and then
customer service representative is a
representative who provides customer
service so we again have the first
possible interpretation and then the
last example is state chess tournament
if we try to parse this phrase the same
way as the previous two we would assume
that state and chess are connected and
that is not the case in this particular
example we have the opposite kind of
grouping chess tournament is a unit and
then state chess tournament is a kind of
chess tournament so we have the second
possible parse now I'm going to jump to
a couple of problems from nap law which
is the annual computational linguistics
competition you can do those poems on
your own the first poem is called one
two tree not three but tree by North
Smith Kevin Gimpo and Jason Eisner it
deals with counting the number of parse
trees of sentences and the second
example is called fake paper shelf maker
which is again related to this problem
of grouping nouns it was written by
Willie Costello and it uses Japanese now
pounds as the material for the power and
once you solve those points you can go
back here and find whether your
solutions match the official solutions
now let's look at other types of
ambiguity that appear in natural
language the first time is morphological
ambiguity Joe is quite impossible it
means that Joe is not possible the word
impossible can be morphologically
analyzed as not possible I am means
negation whereas if you look at a
similar word Joe is quite important the
word important looks superficial is
similar to impossible but it means
something very different
it doesn't mean not portent in fact
Portland is not a word by itself so
important is misleadingly considered to
be a negation when it's not now phonetic
examples I already showed you this one
before
Joe's finger got numer now number can be
pronounced as number if you don't know
what the whole sentence means and
similarly the word finger is different
from the word singer which comes from
sing which has a very different
pronunciation and finger doesn't come
from the word thing which doesn't even
exist they can be also ambiguities with
parts of speech whose output Joe won the
first round the word round can be either
a verb a noun or an adjective in this
case it is a noun because it's preceded
by an article and an adjective but in
other contexts it could be a different
part of speech they can also be
syntactic ambiguities code Joe a taxi so
this sentence can be either that you
want to hear a cab for Joe or you want
to name Joe with the name taxi and then
we have propositional phase attachment
this is a classic example
Joe ate pizza with a fork with a fork
can relate to pizza or it can relate to
ate so if it were to refer to pizza it
would mean that somehow the pizza is
connected with the fork which is
definitely
the case here in the second
interpretation with the fork modifies
the verb ate in it tells you the way
that Joe ate the pizza with meatballs if
you use it in a sentence you would say
Joe ate pizza with meatballs in that
case with meatballs modifies pizza Joe
ate pizza with Samantha definitely the
Samantha was not part of the pizza so it
modifies 8 and finally Joe ate pizza
with pleasure again with pleasure
modifies 8 and not pizza since ambiguity
Joe took the bar exam so bar exam can
relate to many different senses of the
word bar in this case it is probably the
legal sense of bar as the association
that qualifies lawyers but if you want
to be really funny about it you can also
interpret it as taking the exam in a
place where you can have drinks
there's also modality ambiguity Joe may
win the lottery so Joe may when the
lottery gives you essentially two
possible worlds one in which he will win
the lottery and one in which he will not
win the lottery and may is a way to
hedge between those two alternative
futures let's look at a few more
examples of ambiguity there's
subjectivity ambiguity Joe believes that
stocks will rise if you hear sentence
like this it should not lead you to
believe that stocks or eyes it just
indicates that somebody believes that
the stocks will rise so this is a
subjective opinion or another instance
of modality the next example is Cece
attachments or C C stands for
coordinating conjunction those are words
like and or and but the examples Joe
likes ripe apples and pears the big UT
here comes from the fact that the
conjunction end can link just apples and
pears but it can also link ripe apples
and pears so in one of the examples the
pears arrived and the other example the
pears are not specified as either ripe
or not ripe
negation ambiguity
Joe likes his pizza with no cheese and
tomatoes
the negation starts with the word no but
whether it applies to just a cheese or
it applies to not cheese and tomatoes is
ambiguous we also have a referential
ambiguity Joe yelled at Mike he had
broken the bike the word here that we
are interested in is he those he
referred to Joe does it refer to Mike or
does it refer to another person well we
can infer from the context that it
probably refers to Mike because
otherwise Joe wouldn't have any reason
to yell at him now let's look at a very
similar example which has a different
interpretation Joe yelled at Mike he was
angry at him well what does he refer to
here is it Mike or Joe well it looks
like it's again a fairly straightforward
to interpret the sequence of sentences
as he referring to Joe because when
people are angry they yell at each other
and in this case Joe is angry at Mike
and therefore he yells at him so he
refers to Joe unlike the previous
example a reflexive ambiguity John
bought him a present
what does him refer to well could it
refer to John probably not in that case
we would have to say something like this
John bought himself a present himself is
a reflexive pronoun that explicitly
refers back to John whereas in John
bought him a present him must refer to
another person one more example of
ambiguities what is known in linguistics
as ellipsis or parallelism Joe gave Mike
a beer and Jeremy a glass of wine so we
have a sentence that consists of two
phrases one where Joe gives beer to Mike
and one where Joe gives Jeremy a glass
of wine yet Joe gave is missing from the
second sentence it can be inferred from
the parallelism of the two components of
the sentence because somebody is
receiving a drink so that person is Mike
in the first example Jeremy in the
second example
whereas the person who's giving the
drink is only shown in the first half of
the sentence that is Joe it's missing in
the second sentence and therefore by
parallelism we can infer that it has to
be Joe again so the full sentence would
read something like this Joe gave Mike a
beer
period Joe gave Jeremy a glass of wine
and one final example of ambiguities
what is known as metonymy let's look at
the sentence Boston called and left a
message for Joe well the word Boston
here is not used in its literal sense as
the city of Boston instead the sentence
means that the office in Boston called
or more specifically a person in the
office in Boston called and after
message for Joe
so when word or expression is used to
refer to some other expression instead
and we have an instance of metonymy in
addition to ambiguous there are many
other sources of difficulties in natural
language processing for example
non-standard slang in novel words and
usages those come up all the time so
let's look at some examples a 360 this
is a model of an airplane the next thing
is a number there can be an infinite
number of different numbers that you can
see in a text phone numbers can be
formatted in many different ways with
the plus at the beginning with
parentheses with or without hyphens in
the middle and so on the word spam used
to be a kind of food and now it's used
as a verb indicating that you're sending
somebody unsolicited email the verb
friend sorry the word friend used to be
a noun but now it is used as a verb as
in he friended me on Facebook some of
the words that you see on the list here
were recently recognized as dictionary
words they did not exist a few years ago
for example Yolo for you only live once
selfie for a picture that you take of
yourself and chillax which is a
combination of chill and relaxed those
words were recently added to major
dictionaries in fact if you go to urban
dictionary you will find a lot of novel
that have very unconventional senses
that you still have to be able to
process in a natural language system the
only warning that I have for you is that
this website is very much r-rated and
you should only be looked at with
parental warning
there are also inconsistencies in text
for example a noun compounds such as
Junior College is a type of college
whereas a compound like College Junior
is a type of person even though the two
phrases have the same words they mean
very different things there's also a
major difference between a pet spray
which is a spray for pets and a pet
llama which is just a small of a llama
you can see that even though the two
sentences have the same structure they
have very different interpretations and
then explicitly spelled is wrong typos
and grammatical errors things like
receipt which people tend to spell
incorrectly very frequently John Hopkins
instead of Johns Hopkins should have
instead of should have there's also
parsing forms that you have to deal with
for example what is a cup holder or a
cup holder could be a person who want a
cup for example cup in golf or it can be
a two inside your car which is used to
hold a cup while you're driving Federal
Reserve Board Chairman again can be
parts in many different ways and later
on in the class we're going to look at
how many different ways in fact there
are to parse this sequence of nouns the
intended interpretation here is that we
have a Federal Reserve which is a United
States National Organization the Federal
Reserve has a board and then a specific
person is the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board what other sources of
difficulties can there be they can be
very complex sentences we looked at some
examples of those before they can be
counterfactual sentences for example if
you were to do this then that would
happen humor and sarcasm computers have
a really hard time dealing with humor
and
chasm as well as metaphor and other non
literal usages of words implicature in
France word knowledge this refers to
cases where a sentence can only make
sense if there is enough shared
knowledge between the people who
communicate for example if I say I was
late because my car broke down a normal
person would understand the sentence
without any difficulty however a
computer would have a hard time because
there's a lot of implied knowledge that
was not explicitly said in that previous
sentence for example my car broke down
implies that I owned the car
I used the car to get to places it also
means that the car has wheels that the
car can break and that when a car breaks
that causes you to be late for a meeting
so what is not explicitly mentioned is
very important for computer and also
what is word knowledge very often you
cannot come up with any reasonable
interpretation of a sentence if you
don't have access to the implied
knowledge that humans take for granted
there's also significant difference
between semantics and pragmatics a
sentence can be semantically correct but
it may have a specific purpose which can
only be called by pragmatics which is
the study of how words and sentences are
used in a given context to achieve
certain goals for example if somebody
asks you do you know the time what are
you going to answer I mean some possible
answers are yes I know all the time or I
do obviously those are correct answers
but they're not what the user what your
interlocutor wants to hear they want to
ask you for the specific time and
language is hard even for humans so we
shouldn't be surprised that even
computers have problems with it for
example for humans there's a distinction
between learning l1 which is a native
language as a child and learning out -
which is learning a foreign language
both of those are known to be very
difficult to learn another instance of
confusion in natural language processing
is the use of synonyms and
phrases synonyms refers to our words
that have similar senses and paraphrases
refers to phrases that have similar
senses so let's look at three services
that come from the Dow Jones the first
sentence says the S&P 500 climbed six
point 93 its best clothes since a
certain date the second sense says the
mass that gained 12 point 22 for its
best showing since a given date and
finally the Dow Jones industrial average
rose through the number of points its
highest level since March 15 you can see
that the three words on the Left climbed
gained and holes are pretty much
synonyms at least in this context
similarly the three phrases on the right
are paraphrases of each other it's best
clothes for its best showing and its
highest level indicate the exact same
meaning in those three examples and the
reason why the newswire uses different
words it's just to be more natural you
don't want to hear in the exact same
sentences the exact same words used over
so in the next segment we're going to
look at some of the background that is
needed to build natural language
processing system specifically the
linguistic and mathematical background